% This is lnbip.tex the demonstration file of the LaTeX macro package for
% Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing from Springer-Verlag.
% It serves as a template for authors as well.
% version 1.0 for LaTeX2e
%
\documentclass[lnbip]{svmultln}
%
\usepackage{makeidx}  % allows for indexgeneration
\usepackage{graphicx}
% \makeindex          % be prepared for an author index
%
\newcommand{\ale}[1]{}%\footnote{ALE: #1}}
\newcommand{\mari}[1]{}%\footnote{MARI: #1}}
\begin{document}
%
\mainmatter % start of the contribution
%
\title{Prototypes are forever\\
  Evolving from a prototype project\\ to a full-featured system}
%
\titlerunning{Prototypes are
  forever} % abbreviated title (for running head)
% also used for the TOC unless \toctitle is used
%
\author{Hugo Corbucci\inst{1} and Mariana V. Bravo \inst{1} and
  Alexandre Freire da Silva\inst{1}and Fernando Freire da
  Silva\inst{1}}
%
\authorrunning{Hugo Corbucci et
  al.}  % abbreviated author list (for running head)
%
%%%% list of authors for the TOC (use if author list has to be
%%%% modified)
\tocauthor{Hugo Corbucci and Mariana V. Bravo and Alexandre Freire da
  Silva and Fernando Freire da Silva}
%
\institute{Agilbits, Sao Paulo, Brazil,\\
  \email{{hugo,marivb,freire,fernando}@agilbits.com.br}}

\maketitle % typeset the title of the contribution
% \index{Ekeland, Ivar} % entries for the author index
% \index{Temam, Roger} % of the whole volume
% \index{Dean, Jeffrey}

\begin{abstract} % give a summary of your paper
  Prototypes are a well known, widely accepted development practice
  but, if not carefully evolved, they can become a nightmare to
  maintain. This paper presents the experience of a four person agile
  team who successfully grew a prototyped system to a full-featured
  application without any clear transition in the project. The paper
  describes how the project started with a very simple prototyping
  goal, evolved through iterations and spikes to a partly working
  system and transformed, in the end, in a complete application widely
  tested and refactored.

  % please supply keywords within your abstract TODO Keywords
  \keywords {prototype, agile methods, refactoring}
\end{abstract}
%
\section{Introduction}

Prototyping is an activity that most developers have heard about. Fred
Brooks mentioned it in The Mythical Man-Month~\cite{Brooks1975} as one
of the best ways to provide a quick view of a feature to the clients
or users to help them make a choice. Many agile methods - Dynamic
System Development Method (DSDM)~\cite{DSDM} is heavily based on
prototyping - adopt ideas related to this concept, like
spikes~\cite{XP} in Extreme Programming.

Successful software prototypes look very much like complete features
given a certain execution path. Therefore it is common that the
customers are so satisfied that they want to integrate the prototypes
into the working system and move on. The problem is that prototypes
are frequently created in a ``quick and dirty'' fashion and the result
is not adequate to be incorporated in a full-featured
system. Furthermore, it is quite hard to explain this fact to the
stakeholders who usually do not want to invest any more money in this
``already working'' feature. The consequence is that they switch
priorities, focus developer work efforts on other parts of the system
and leave the rough prototype lost within the code base. In the long
run, the prototype becomes a part of the system but it is filled with
bugs, unhandled corner cases and, frequently, cruddy code. Nobody
remembers what it was supposed to do or whether it is really
important. Maintainability is deeply affected and developers get that
natural and unpleasant I-told-you-so feeling. %TODO trauma?

Developers who have been through the pain of maintaining dirty
prototypes are no longer enthusiastic about prototypes. If they have
to, they arrange their work so that there will be absolutely no way to
integrate the prototype to the existing system. They often do this by
either using a different platform, language or even creating
prototypes in other media. This inflexibility can reduce the ability
to respond to changes quickly and therefore harm the clients'
interests.

This paper describes how a four-people collocated team managed to
start a prototyping project and evolve it naturally into a
full-featured application.  We have organized this experience report
in chronological order of the project's evolution. Section
\ref{sec:start} will present the project as it was first introduced to
the development team. Section \ref{sec:working} presents the work
process established by the team to create the software based on
prototypes. After some time, the team felt that the customer needed a
full featured application. We describe this change in Section
\ref{sec:changes}. The following section (Section \ref{sec:adapting})
shows how the team adapted to evolve the prototype to a production
ready application. Finally, Section \ref{sec:nowadays} presents the
current status of the project and Section \ref{sec:conclusion}
concludes with a summary of practices that we used to go through this
experience without much pain.

\section{Starting the project}
\label{sec:start}

Back in March 2008, our company was hired to do some consulting for
one of the largest movie production companies in Brazil. The client
had a great idea for an application for movie-script writers but had
absolutely no knowledge about software development.  He wanted to
investigate the idea and understand how much investment it would take
to turn it into working software in order to establish his business
plan. The company's job at the time was to scout the market, discover
competitors and provide an estimation of the work required to develop
the client's idea.

For this, a consultant was assigned the task of understanding the
client's needs and desires and two developers were asked to analyze
the existing script writing programs and evaluate possible development
paths. After about 3 weeks of consulting and study, the team produced
a deck of story cards with two estimates each, based on the use of two
possible platforms. The first platform was an existing open source
software with several features and a copy-left
license\footnote{http://celtx.com/ -- Last accessed on 27/02/2010};
the second one was an Eclipse Rich Client
Application\footnote{http://www.eclipse.org/rcp -- Last accessed on
  27/02/2010} developed from scratch using Eclipse's open source
framework.

This initial estimate suggested that a four person team dedicating
four daily work hours would be able to build a working prototype of
each feature in approximately nine months using the existing open
source software and in roughly one year using Eclipse's platform. The
open source solution had the advantage of providing full functionality
of several other features. For a complete system, the estimate was
well over two years of work on the Eclipse version and about a year
and a half for the open source one.

After some discussion, the client opted for the Eclipse based solution
due to a license restriction of the open source one which conflicted
with his business plan. He also chose to develop only a prototype of
the idea since two years seemed like too heavy of an investment for
him.

After the exploration phase, the consulting contract ended and a new
negotiable scope contract~\cite{XP} with emphasis on development
effort was signed. This new contract established a team of four
developers working with an open scope that would be negotiated
monthly, providing 160 hours of work each month. It specifically
stated that the developers would work in pairs all the time and that
the developed system should have automated tests for the production
code.

% Initial priority of the stories, taken from Paulo's spreadsheet:
% Phase 1 => read TXT / separate and number act, sequence and scenes /
% read and show touch / read and show "thread" (characters) / "vision"
% (script tree) / zoom / add notes (summary) / edit touch and
% "threads" Phase 2 => create script from scratch / edit script text /
% "mundo das fichas" Phase 3 => read RTF / read and export FDR

The features initially presented to the team were organized by the
client into three priority groups. The first group contained all
features most critical to the client, the ones that would allow him to
experiment with his ``big idea''. The second one consisted of some
features already present in most script editors in the market, such as
editing the script text itself. Most features in this second group
were in fact epics \cite{Cohn2004}. The third group contained only the
features needed to read and export to different file formats, such as
those used by competing programs.

The project's goal was to create a visual high fidelity prototype with
mostly faked or simplified features from the first group. The client
would use this prototype to present his ideas to investors by October
2008. This meeting would either boost the project's development to a
full featured system if the investors liked the idea or end its
development in the case that they rejected it.

This was the team's vision of the project when development began, a
short seven month project whose fate would be decided by its capacity
to impress investors. Therefore, the main goal was to provide support
for the client's demonstration to ensure the project's growth and
success. The next section (Section \ref{sec:working}) describes how
the team organized itself to achieve this goal.

\section{Prototyping phase}
\label{sec:working}

Given the project's objective, the customer always prioritized new
features considering only one specific usage scenario. This meant
that, for most features, there were several cases which the team was
asked \textbf{not} to handle. Regarding the source code, it meant that
no verification or validation was written and the prototype would
likely crash if the user did not behave as expected. We also
incorporated several spikes as permanent solutions and did not handle
a fair number of exceptions.

The team knew from the start that the client would change his mind
over time. After all, it was partly to better understand his idea and
its applicability that he wanted to build this prototype. This meant
that features would be developed and later thrown away while code
produced only for a quick spike was going to become part of the
system. Therefore, the team invested only as much design, automated
tests and refactoring as needed to keep the system flexible enough to
receive the next changes. The team also made it clear to the client
that some work would need to be done on features after he accepted
them in order to polish the work.

From the start, the team installed a continuous integration
server\footnote{http://www.jetbrains.com/teamcity/ - Last accessed on
  27/02/2010} to automatically build a new version of the system
hourly. With this in place, the client could follow the system's
evolution, test the features and provide feedback within a very short
time span. This allowed for absolutely no surprises in review meetings
and greatly improved the team's ability to tune each feature as it was
released.

The first few iterations went quite smoothly, developing features from
the first phase which involved importing a script in a text-only
format marked with some meta-data and providing a simple way to
manipulate and visualize this data. For these first features, it was
easy to avoid inconsistencies since there were few business rules
involved.

Meanwhile, the client's demonstration script was evolving as the
prototype did and the team was able to use conditionals as needed to
ignore cases he would not enter during his presentation to
investors. By October 2008, the main features from the first group
were ready for demonstration, although not finished and polished for
real use. However, by testing and playing with these features, the
client felt that the program lacked an important aspect of script
editing programs: the text editor itself. It was an epic initially
included only in the second group of features, but he wanted to see
how the text editor would integrate to allow viewing and editing of
the meta-data he was creating. Therefore, he prioritized the inclusion
of an incipient text editor in the prototype and started to detail
stories related to this editor.

As a result of this discovery, the client did not feel completely
confident to present the software to the investors; even so, he
started to make contact with a few people to schedule a meeting during
December 2008. That date became our new deadline. All efforts were
focused on making a prototyped text editor available for the
demonstration.

At this point, the pressure for polishing the new features
increased. Time was running out for the demonstration that would
decide the project's fate. The customer wanted the team to ignore
corner cases, speed up delivery and ensure the demonstration would run
smoothly. The excitement from this important presentation to other
people (only our client and us had seen the software so far) was
strong motivation for the development team to deliver all features the
client had asked for. Yet, despite unit testing and pair programming
being mandatory rules, the general will to quickly deliver the
features decreased the code quality considerably. However, external
interference was about to change the situation. Section
\ref{sec:changes} will explain how the project got affected and what
new direction those changes pointed to.

\section{Changing the rules}
\label{sec:changes}

December 2008 came and went without any meeting. The company that the
client was in contact with had just been acquired by another one so
any project presentation was useless until things settled down. This
relieved the pressure of the upcoming deadline and we finally
acknowledged the burden of unhandled technical debt. All members of
the development team agreed that the code was getting complex and the
quality was decreasing. This had a negative effect on productivity and
speed which complemented the client's request for a more complete text
editor, with fewer mock-ups and simplifications. The first iteration
of 2009 was dedicated entirely to refactoring the prototyped editor we
had so far, and the iterations that followed further developed this
editor to include more business rules.

Although the meeting with investors was mentioned in this period,
again it did not take place. The general feeling the development team
had was that the project was no longer aimed at a simple presentation
to investors. It was slowly becoming a more elaborate end-user
oriented application. This seemed to be confirmed by two important and
concomitant changes that happened between June and July 2009.

In that period, the client was asking for a much more complex and
full-featured text editor. At the same time, he was exploring and
wanted to develop new features to evolve his previous idea. At this
point, the client started to understand the dilemma that the
developers had felt so far.  How could we keep a good rhythm of new
feature delivery and still cover most of the use cases for current
features?

The team estimated that it would take at least three full iterations
to have an editor with the more complex functionality expected by the
client. He did not welcome this news, since it would mean that no new
features would be added for a while and he wanted to explore them with
the investors' meeting still in mind.  We then decided to investigate
other possible solutions for the text editor rather than just
developing from scratch. After some research we discovered an open
source Eclipse Rich Client WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) HTML
editor\footnote{\url{http://onpositive.com/richtext/} -- Last accessed
  on 20/02/2010}. The editor relies on a reimplementation of Eclipse's
\texttt{StyledText} component which is responsible for rendering text
within Eclipse editors. This project was close enough to the one we
needed to implement, having some of the functionality our client
wanted on our application, and it was maintained mostly by one Russian
company. We suggested the possibility of outsourcing the development
of the underlying text editor infra-structure to this company, thus
enabling us to continue working on the new features the client
wanted. He accepted this idea and this was the first change that
confirmed the shift towards a more full-featured system.

At the same time, the team learned that the client had formed a
dramaturgy experts group to help him better understand how to
structure the application, the existing features and the new ones. The
software was now going to have a set of beta testers and it needed to
perform decently to allow the users to suggest improvements. However,
the current development approach would not be able to support this new
use of the system. The change had to be clear to the client so that
development efforts would be directed to address this new way of
working.

Evidence of the software's deficiency came quickly from the dramaturgy
study group. They started having trouble with several known and
unknown corner cases, unexpected behaviors and just plain old
bugs. The client recognized this problem and, despite the fact that it
would mean new features delivered more slowly, decided it was time to
invest more in usability and user experience. This was the second
change that confirmed the shift in the project's purpose.

Meanwhile, the development team was concerned with the increasing
complexity so they started to track some data from the source
code. The first metrics were the amount of \texttt{FIXME},
\texttt{TODO} and \texttt{XXX} marks in the code. Since the beginning,
the development team had added those marks everywhere they felt a
corner case or a behavior existed but was not handled. Each mark had a
small comment associated and the kind of the mark determined the
criticality of the problem. Figure \ref{fig:TODOs} shows the evolution
of those marks during the project.

\begin{figure}[hbt]
  \centerline{
    \includegraphics[width=120mm]{TODOs}
  }
  \caption{Evolution of FIXME, TODO and XXX marks in the source code}
  \label{fig:TODOs}
\end{figure}

It is noticeable that the first data collection of those marks is
dated for mid July 2009. It took the team some time to consider this
metric was important enough to be automatically tracked. To
consciously acknowledge that the team needed to track complexity was
step one to adapt to the new direction. The next section will present
other practices that allowed us to handle this shift.

\section{Adapting to the new rules}
\label{sec:adapting}

The amount of \texttt{TODO} marks was fairly high but the team still
had to develop new prototyped features and therefore they decided to
just track it and try to keep it under control. While this gave the
team some idea of code complexity, it did not help to show if this
complexity was being tamed by tests.

By the beginning of August 2009, the client decided that it was
important for him to be able to see the evolution of the work done by
the Russian team and he asked to have two editors available on the
application. The first one was our original simplified one and the
second one was based on the new outsourced component. At this point,
we introduced a lot of code duplication because features available in
the original editor were supposed to be also available on the new
editor.

The result was a huge increase in the marks tracked as well as an
increase in lines of code. The team suspected tests were not following
this trend. A very simple script was written to count the lines of
production code and test code. Figure \ref{fig:LOCs} shows how both
metrics evolved over time. It starts at the same date as Figure
\ref{fig:TODOs} to facilitate comparisons.

As with the \texttt{TODO} metric, the lines of code showed the team a
small issue regarding testing but it was not addressed immediately. It
was well known that the code did not have much coverage. There were no
User Interface (UI) tests and quite a few features were related to the
way data was shown. However, the team had a feeling that the effort to
test the controller and model should have produced more test than
code.

\begin{figure}[hbt]
  \centerline{
    \includegraphics[width=120mm]{LOCs}
  }
  \caption{Evolution of production lines of code and test lines of
    code}
  \label{fig:LOCs}
\end{figure}

By this time, the customer brought up the idea of a presentation to
the investors again, the project had been going for quite some time
and he was feeling he had spent enough money and needed some external
investment. Therefore the old investor meeting pressure appeared
within the team and the deadline was, again, the end of the year. The
goal was to quickly integrate the outsourced component and tune a few
features for the much expected meeting.

Because of the rush to deliver new features, the code had reached a
critical situation. \texttt{TODO} marks were amazingly high and
distance between tests and code was at its highest level.  During this
period, the work was being roughly divided in three tasks: fixing
bugs, implementing new features and integrating the outsourced
component. Around September 2009, the team also suffered the loss of a
member who was required for full time consulting work. The team went
from two pairs to one pair and an extra person, and the velocity
decreased.

Figure \ref{fig:InstanceOfs} shows yet another complexity metric used
by the team. Counting the number of occurrences of the
\texttt{instanceof} Java reserved word led the team to understand the
level of special cases unfactored in the code. The team felt reducing
this number would lead to better factored code.

\begin{figure}[hbt]
  \centerline{
    \includegraphics[width=120mm]{InstanceOfs}
  }
  \caption{Evolution of instanceof in the code }
  \label{fig:InstanceOfs}
\end{figure}

Curiously, as with the two previous metrics, the effect of tracking
the number of \texttt{instanceof} was not immediate. More
interestingly than that, in a short time span, having the metric did
not stop it from getting worse. In the rush to produce the features,
the team was becoming reckless with code quality.  Something had to be
done or the project was going to become very hard to maintain and the
client's demonstration would surely suffer from it.

With three persons working at the end of the year to match two pairs
velocity and reducing complexity, the team had to calm down, step back
and rethink about agile values. Section \ref{sec:nowadays} presents
the resolutions the team adopted and their impact on the current
version of the system.

\section{Current status}
\label{sec:nowadays}

December arrived and it was time to perform a full integration of the
outsourced component and throw away the team's first solution. Along
with this came a considerable decrease in \texttt{TODO} marks,
\texttt{instanceof}s and lines of production code. A large source of
duplication was erased. By that time, the team was mostly working with
just two persons pairing full time since the third developer was
involved in other projects and rarely managed to pair up with the
others.

The team decided to profit from this fact and instituted a merciless
refactoring policy. No matter how small or how big the refactoring
was, it had to be done and it was to be included as a regular part of
each task and not as a separated task. Corner cases were not to be
left unhandled and the execution of any user behavior which the client
had not prioritized was to be logged to the application error log. The
impact of those policies was fairly clear by the end of the month. All
metrics had improved and more bugs were being identified by the
development team.

The month passed and no meeting was scheduled. The famous deadline
was, once again, a myth. With code quality increasing, \texttt{TODO}
marks decreasing, test code improving and bugs being caught by the
development team (instead of the users), the team felt an extra
developer would help increase velocity and so started to train one to
join the team in January. The general feeling was that the client was
getting ready to wrap up the project since he was quite happy with the
software and was considering he had invested too much already on this
idea.

However, in the next meeting, the client presented an officially hired
beta tester that was going to support the team in order to improve the
usability of the system. He also presented the team with many new
features and usability improvements that he wanted to have done. The
client also mentioned that he was seriously thinking about dropping
the quest for investors and releasing the product by himself. In order
to do so, bugs needed to be eliminated. All bugs found were
immediately given the highest priority and should be solved in some
way as soon as possible.

Since that time, the beta tester has helped the client to identify
some inconsistencies in the business rules. Thanks to the experience
that the client had accumulated so far in the project, he allowed
himself to experiment with a few solutions and alternatives to these
problems until he felt more comfortable with the way features worked,
allowing him to seek consistency, conceptual integrity and the
certainty that other choices were not as good as the one he had made.

\section{Conclusion}
\label{sec:conclusion}

Successful software prototypes need not always be completely thrown
away. This fact comes from the very nature of software and the ability
to easily and quickly merge pieces of code together to produce a
working program using agile methodologies. Agility relies on this fact
to allow for incremental evolution of the system and, therefore,
supports that fact that prototypes can grow to complete features.

By embracing the idea that, if your prototypes are successful, they
will be incorporated into the software, you can be prepared to
maintain that code. It does not mean that prototypes should be
developed exactly as well known complete features. Prototyping should
allow you to explore different solutions and as they survive the
selection process they should be refactored and evolved in a similar
fashion to the set-based lean approach~\cite{Poppendieck2009}.

Refactoring, testing and decoupling are essential to allow code
evolution and should be practices that are strongly enforced as the
prototype starts to transform into a working feature.  Unhandled
exceptions, cases or behaviors should be documented with tests or some
other mean that allows for quick listing and search.

Although prototypes are not first class production code and much of
their value comes from this lower class status, they are likely to
turn into essential features of the system. It is very important to
track this evolution and provide the necessary support to maintain
quality. Even so, there should be no fear about throwing away code
either.  The value provided by prototypes resides deeply in the
knowledge they bring to the customers, which means the code is much
less valuable then we give it credit for. In our experience, using
prototypes to experiment with different ideas for the same feature
proved invaluable, and many accepted prototypes were able to evolve to
production code in the application.

%
% ---- Bibliography ----
%
\begin{thebibliography}{5}

\bibitem{Brooks1975} Brooks Jr., F.P.: The Mythical Man Month: Essays
  on Software Engineering. Addison-Wesley (1975)

\bibitem{DSDM} DSDM Consortium: DSDM: Business Focused
  Development. Addison-Wesley (2002)
  
\bibitem{XP} Kent Beck and Cynthia Andres: Extreme Programming
  Explained: Embrace Change, 2nd Edition. Addison-Wesley (2004)

  % ale: achei que era uma boa ter mais referências sobre
  % prototipos. eu tirei essa história de prototipos de alta
  % fidelidade visual ou alta fidelidade funcional de uma apresentação
  % que vi sobre UX e prototipagem de interface lá na locaweb, no
  % scholar.google achei isso aqui:

  % http://74.125.155.132/scholar?q=cache:ezGZKBBRVhwJ:scholar.google.com/+software+prototype&hl=pt-BR&as_sdt=2000

  % http://www.imamu.edu.sa/Scientific_selections/abstracts/Documents/A%20Systematic%20Look%20At%20Prototyping.pdf

\bibitem{Cohn2004} Cohn, M. : User Stories Applied: For Agile Software
  Development. Adding-Wesley (2004)

\bibitem{Poppendieck2009} Poppendieck, M. and Poppendieck, T.:
  Implementing Lean Software Devleopment: From Concept to
  Cash. Addison-Wesley (2009)

\end{thebibliography}
%
\end{document}
